=== PAGE 78 ===
Chapter 11
Communication Platform
The communication platform forms the real-time interaction backbone of the APNILEAP
OS, facilitating seamless collaboration between academia and industry stakeholders. This
chapter provides a rigorous architectural and implementation-level detailing of the chat,
meeting, and media processing services. We explore the utilization of WebRTC, LiveKit
for Selective Forwarding Unit (SFU) capabilities, persistent messaging infrastructure,
media recording pipelines, and the integration of the AI Meeting Assistant.
11.1 Real-Time Communication Architecture
The foundation of the APNILEAP communication platform relies on modern real-time
protocols, predominantly WebRTC (Web Real-Time Communication), to enable peer-
to-peer and server-mediated video, audio, and data transfer. However, a pure peer-to-
peer mesh topology does not scale beyond a small number of participants. Therefore,
APNILEAP employs an SFU architecture mediated by LiveKit.
11.1.1 Selective Forwarding Unit (SFU) with LiveKit
LiveKit serves as the core SFU infrastructure. Unlike Multipoint Control Units (MCUs)
that decode, mix, and re-encode media streams, an SFU forwards incoming media streams
to all other participants without transcoding, signicantly reducing server-side CPU uti-
lization and latency while allowing clients to choose which streams to render.
The LiveKit server is deployed within the Kubernetes cluster, utilizing host networking
or optimized UDP routing to minimize packet loss and latency.
11.2 Meeting Lifecycle and Authentication
The lifecycle of a meeting in APNILEAP involves robust room management and secure
token-based authentication.
11.2.1 Room Provisioning and Token Generation
When a user initiates or joins a meeting, the APNILEAP backend acts as the authoritative
entity. It communicates with the LiveKit server via Server APIs to create a room if it
does not exist, and generates a JWT (JSON Web Token) for the user.
63

=== PAGE 79 ===
CHAPTER 11. COMMUNICATION PLATFORM APNILEAP Enterprise Architecture Book
Client A
(Publisher)
Client B
(Subscriber)
Client C
(Subscriber)
LiveKit SFU
1x Video/Audio Stream
StreamStream
Control/SignalingControl/Signaling Control
Figure 11.1: SFU Architecture over LiveKit
The token payload includes specic grants that dictate the user's permissions within
the room (e.g., ability to publish video, publish audio, or record the session).
Web Client Backend API LiveKit Server
1. POST /api/meetings/join
2. CreateRoom (if needed)
3. Room details
4. Generate JWT with Grants
5. Return RoomName & JWT
6. Connect via WebSocket + JWT
7. WebRTC PeerConnection established
Figure 11.2: Meeting Connection and Authentication Sequence
11.2.2 WebRTC Signaling and ICE Negotiation
Once the WebSocket connection is established with LiveKit, signaling commences. The
client and server exchange Session Description Protocol (SDP) oers and answers. Si-
multaneously, Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) candidate gathering occurs
to determine the optimal network path (UDP, TCP, or TURN). For strict corporate re-
walls, a dedicated TURN server deployment guarantees fallback connectivity over port
443.
11.3 Chat and Messaging System
While LiveKit provides an ephemeral data channel suitable for in-meeting chat, AP-
NILEAP requires a persistent, universally accessible messaging system independent of
Page 64

=== PAGE 80 ===
CHAPTER 11. COMMUNICATION PLATFORM APNILEAP Enterprise Architecture Book
active video sessions.
11.3.1 WebSocket Infrastructure
The persistent chat system is built upon scalable WebSocket servers, heavily utilizing
Redis Pub/Sub for message broadcasting across multiple backend instances. When a
user sends a message, it is validated, persisted to the PostgreSQL database, and then
published to the relevant Redis channel (e.g.,channel:{workspace_id}).
11.3.2 Implementation of Message Persistence
The database schema is optimized for rapid retrieval of conversational history.
CREATE TABLE messages (
id UUID PRIMARY KEY DEFAULT uuid_generate_v4(),
channel_id UUID REFERENCES channels(id),
sender_id UUID REFERENCES users(id),
content TEXT NOT NULL,
created_at TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT NOW(),
updated_at TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
is_deleted BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE,
attachments JSONB
);
CREATE INDEX idx_messages_channel_created ON messages(channel_id, created_at DESC);
11.4 Recording and Media Processing Pipeline
APNILEAP provides enterprise-grade recording capabilities through LiveKit Egress.
11.4.1 LiveKit Egress Integration
When a recording is triggered via the API, the backend invokes the LiveKit Egress service.
Egress launches a headless Chrome instance or utilizes a direct track composite to render
the meeting layout. It then encodes this layout into an MP4 le in real-time.
11.4.2 Storage and Archiving
Upon completion of the meeting, the Egress service uploads the encoded media le di-
rectly to a cloud storage bucket (e.g., A WS S3). A webhook is then dispatched to the
APNILEAP backend, containing the storage object key and metadata. The backend
updates the meeting record, making the recording instantly available for playback via
pre-signed URLs.
11.5 AI Meeting Assistant
The AI Meeting Assistant acts as an invisible, highly capable participant in every gover-
nance and collaboration session, providing real-time transcription, translation, and post-
meeting intelligence.
Page 65

=== PAGE 81 ===
CHAPTER 11. COMMUNICATION PLATFORM APNILEAP Enterprise Architecture Book
11.5.1 Real-Time Audio Extraction and Transcription
During a meeting, the LiveKit server is congured to utilize SIP or SIP-like audio stream-
ing to forward mixed audio tracks to the AI processing service. The audio service utilizes
streaming Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) models (such as Whisper or a propri-
etary low-latency equivalent) to generate real-time transcripts.
AI Meeting Assistant Data Flow
11.5.2 Large Language Model (LLM) Integration
Post-meeting, the complete transcript is fed into a ne-tuned Large Language Model.
The system employs specic prompt engineering techniques to instruct the LLM to:
1.Summarize:Generate concise executive summaries of the discussion.
2.Action Item Extraction:Identify explicit and implicit tasks, assigning them to
mentioned stakeholders.
3.Sentiment and Governance Analysis:Ensure the discussion aligned with the
predetermined agenda and standard industry-academia collaboration frameworks.
The output is structured into JSON, validated against expected schemas, and stored
in the PostgreSQL database, linked relationally to the meeting object. The embeddings
of the transcripts are also stored in a Vector Database to enable semantic search across
all historical APNILEAP meetings.
Page 66

=== PAGE 82 ===
Part V
UI and Dashboard Architecture
67